Blendsnap is an addon for Blender 2.9x <https://www.blender.org/> that
lets you keep track of multiple versions of a .blend file using an
SQLite <https://sqlite.org/> database. Blender itself lets
you keep older versions of a file each time you save, up to a maximum
of 32; using a snapshot system extends this to unlimited versions, and
also lets you attach a comment to each one to remind yourself why it
was saved.

Once you have installed the addon and enabled it for the current
document, you will see an extra submenu at the bottom of your “File”
menu, entitled “Snapshots”: this contains two items, “Load
Snapshot...” and “Save Snapshot...”. Selecting “Save Snapshot...” will
display a popup letting you enter a comment to be associated with this
snapshot; clicking “OK” will save the current document, along with any
external files it depends on (fonts, images, libraries, sounds,
scripts) into the snapshot file and attach the comment. If your
document is called “foo.blend”, then the snapshot file will be called
“foo.blend;”. Note that the document has to have been saved at least
once (i.e. it cannot be untitled) before the snapshot file can be
created, because it takes its name from the .blend file.

Having snapshotted a version of the document, you can reload that
version at any subsequent time by selecting “Load Snapshot...”: this
will display a list of the timestamps and comments associated with all
the snapshots you previously saved, from which you can select one and
click “OK” to reload that version. This will WIPE OUT THE COPY OF THE
DOCUMENT YOU WERE WORKING ON (both in-memory and on-disk) ALONG WITH
ITS DEPENDENCIES, so you may want to make sure that was also saved in
the snapshot database before loading the older version.

Blender doesn’t seem to allow for attaching “Cancel” buttons to popup
dialogs; however, you can dismiss the load and save dialogs without
performing any action by pressing the Escape key.

## To Git Or Not To Git ##

I previously wrote another addon called Blendgit
<https://github.com/ldo/blendgit/> which does the same sort of thing,
only saving the versions in a Git repository. Git
<https://git-scm.com/> is very popular among developers -- I use it
myself for just about all my software projects, including this one.

Git is designed to keep track of the differences between versions.
This is important to developers, who often need to trace back through
the modification history to discover when a newly-discovered bug was
introduced. Git supports multiple simultaneous branches of development
(for example, a “stable” branch with only incremental bugfix changes
allowed, versus an “experimental” branch with new, unstable
enhancements still undergoing testing). It also allows for merging of
branches, so that for example bug fixes done on one branch can also be
incorporated into another parallel branch. Sometimes merges can
have conflicts, which require some hand-editing to fix.

But such features depend on being able to keep track of differences between
files, which really only works with text files. This is true of program
sources, and it is also true of some content document formats, like
SVG and Markdown. But it is not true of .blend files, or of image
textures which are commonly used in CG work. This limits the usefulness
of Git for keeping track of the modification history of such files.

Also, revisions in a Git repo are constrained to follow a parent-child
relationship. But without the ability to implement branching and
merging of documents, this also does not seem very useful.

Thus, I decided to abandon the idea of using Git altogether, and
adopt the simpler model of a collection of snapshots of your documents.
Each snapshot has a timestamp and can also have a descriptive message
associated with it, and that’s it. There is no concept of branching
or merging, or of parent-child relationships. It is possible to go
back and change the descriptive message associated with a snapshot
(not possible with Git revision comments, without rewriting the
commit history), and selectively delete past snapshots when it is
decided they are no longer needed, to save space or reduce clutter.

Lawrence D'Oliveiro <ldo@geek-central.gen.nz>
2021 May 6
